Hitting a Baseball: A Biomechanical Description 
Christian M. Welch, BS ' 
Scott A. Banks, PhD 
Frank F. Cook, MD3 
Pete Draovitch, MS, PT, ATC, CSCS4 
or as long as the game of 
baseball has been played, 
hitting has intrigued play- 
ers, coaches, and research- 
ers alike. Advancing tech- 
nology has facilitated the ability to 
capture the act of hitting and analyze 
the mechanics involved. In 1961, 
Race (14), with the aid of a 16mm 
movie camera and the swings of 17 
minor league players, presented one 
of the first effective qualitative and 
quantitative breakdowns of the over- 
all swing. The concepts of kinetic 
linking, angular measurement, bal- 
ance, and judgment time were intro- 
duced and supported with data. 
In subsequent studies, the ability 
to transform standard film and video 
into a three-dimensional representa- 
tion of the captured hitting motion 
not only increased the accuracy of 
measurement, but introduced new 
analysis parameters. Using this tech- 
nology, Shapiro (17), in a study of 
bat dynamics, described the bat's 
movement during the swing using 
the three-dimensional components 
of its motion, while DeRenne (4), 
through a series of studies, developed 
an elaborate method of assessing a 
hitter's mechanical efficiency. 
The combination of biomechani- 
cal research and traditional baseball 
knowledge has begun the process of 
research and investigation (1,6,7,12, 
18.19). The missing component to 
this point has been the ability to 
build a comprehensive understanding 
of the body's natural coordination 
and movement during the swing. 
Once a baseline understanding has 
A tremendous amount of time and energy has been dedicated to the development of 
conditioning programs, mechanics drills, and rehabilitation protocols for the throwing athlete. In 
comparison, a significantly smaller amount has been spent on the needs of the hitting athlete. Before 
these needs can be addressed, an understanding of mechanics and the demands placed on the body 
during the swing must be developed. This study uses three-dimensional kinematic and kinetic data to 
define and quantify biomechanics during the baseball swing. The results show that a hitter starts the 
swing with a weight shih toward the rear foot and the generation of trunk coil. As the hitter strides 
forward, force applied by the front foot equal to 123% of body weight promotes segment acceler- 
ation around the axis of the t~nk. The hip segment rotates to a maximum speed of 714Ysec 
followed by a maximum shoulder segment velocity of 937%~. The product of this kinetic link is a 
maximum linear bat velocity of 31 dsec. By quantikng the hitting motion, a more educated 
approach can be made in developing rehabilitation, strength, and conditioning programs for the 
hitting athlete. 
Key Words: biomechanics, baseball, batting 
' President, Human Performance Technologies, Inc., 825 South U.S. Highway One, Suite 200, jupiter, FL 
33477 
Technical Director, Orthopaedic Research Laboratory, Good Samaritan Medical Center, West Palm Beach, FL 
' Co-Medical Director, Orthopaedic Research Laboratory, Good Samaritan Medical Center, West Palm 
Beach, FL 
Consultant, Orthopa& Research Laboratory, Good Samaritan Medical Center, West Palm Beach, FL 
been developed, we can move on to 
investigate the intricacies of specific 
mechanical parameters and relate 
this information to a hitter's ability at 
the plate. The goal of this study was 
to develop an understanding of base- 
line mechanics through quantitative 
biomechanical data and provide a 
preliminary synthesis of results for 
the application to training and reha- 
bilitation. 
METHODS 
Testing Procedure 
Thirty-nine (25 right-handed hit- 
ters and 14 left-handed hitters) male 
professional baseball players were 
tested at an indoor biomechanics fa- 
cility. In order to maintain uniformity 
in the population used for this study, 
only the right-handed subjects were 
considered. Of the 25 right-handed 
hitters, only those who had at least 
100 "at-bats" and a minimum batting 
average of .250 during the 1993 sea- 
son were included. Each minor 
league player's batting statistics were 
combined for all clubs and organiza- 
tions played with during the 1993 
season. 
Data included in this study, based 
on the defined criteria, were gener- 
ated from seven subjects. The mean 
batting average for the subjects was 
.293 (t .OX) and the average num- 
ber of "at-bats" was 273 ( t 168). The 
JOSPT Volume 22 Number 5 November 1995 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on April 15, 2026. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 1995 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.

RESEARCH STUDY 
seven subjects' level of play ranged 
from minor league to major league. 
At the time of testing, six subjects 
were playing in the minor leagues 
and one subject was playing in the 
major leagues. The average weight 
was 844 N (224 N) and the average 
height was 1.83 m (2.06 m). 
Preceding data collection, a sys- 
tem of 23 reflective markers was 
placed on the hitter, bat, and ball. 
Markers applied directly to the skin 
were held securely in place with soft 
foam adhesive biofeedback pads 
(Davicon, Billerica, MA). "Stick" 
markers, pelvis markers, and wrist 
markers were held in place using 
Neoprene wraps and VelcroTM. 
Marker placement (Figure 1) includ- 
ed: I) right and left shoulder placed 
at the acromioclavicular joint, 
2) neck placed at C7 of the spine, 
3) right and left elbow placed at the 
lateral epicondyle, 4) right and left 
wrist placed dorsally between the ul- 
nar and radial styloid process, 5) sa- 
crum marker placed at L5 of the 
spine, 6) right and left anterior supe- 
rior illiac spine, 7) right and left 
thigh using a "stick" marker to define 
the frontal plane, 8) right and left 
knee placed at the joint line, 9) right 
Once a baseline 
understanding has 
been developed, we 
can move on to 
investigate the 
intricacies of specific 
mechanical parameters. 
and left shank using a "stick" marker 
to define the frontal plane, 10) right 
and left ankle placed at the lateral 
malleoli, 11) right and left forefoot 
placed on top of the shoe, 12) reflec- 
tive tape on the ball, and 13) reflec- 
tive tape around the bat handle just 
FIGURE 1. Marker placement for subject, bat, and ball. 
above the hands and at the top of 
the barrel end of the bat. 
After the subject had warmed up 
and the reflective markers had been 
securely applied, he was instructed to 
hit a number of baseballs off of a 
standard batting tee. The tee was 
placed in the hitting area so that the 
designated batter's box was com- 
prised of two force plates. The force 
plates were arranged side by side so 
that the subject could comfortably 
place each foot on an individual 
force plate. The tee was adjusted to 
the subject's preferred position and 
height to hit a line drive "up the 
middle," based on both verbal com- 
munication with the subject and 
warm-up performance. The subject 
was then asked to hit a ball marked 
with reflective tape for data collec- 
tion. The three best line drive hits 
were used for data in this study. Cri- 
teria for determining the three best 
line drive hits included verbal com- 
munication with the subject, contact, 
flight of the ball, and accuracy of 
data collection. 
During data collection, the move- 
ment of the reflective markers was 
simultaneously captured by six cam- 
eras at a rate of 200 frames per sec- 
ond (Motion Analysis Corporation, 
Santa Rosa, CA). The information 
collected by each of the six cameras 
was then mathematically processed 
and the three-dimensional movement 
of each marker was calculated using 
Expert Vision digitizing software (Mo- 
tion Analysis Corporation, Santa 
Rosa, CA). In addition, the three- 
dimensional ground reaction forces 
were measured for each foot at a rate 
of 1000 samples per second using two 
sixchannel force plates (Advanced 
Mechanical Technology, Inc., New- 
ton, MA). Both the motion and the 
ground reaction force collection sys- 
tems were electronically synchronized 
to begin collection simultaneously. 
The parameters chosen to por- 
tray the motion of the baseball swing 
were consequently based on the bio- 
mechanical data. Kinematics and ki- 
netics were calculated using the 
threedimensional information gener- 
ated during a test. The relative move- 
ment of the reflective markers within 
the global reference frame and 
body/joint reference frames defined 
Volume 22 Number 5 November 1995 JOSPT 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on April 15, 2026. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 1995 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.

RESEARCH STUDY 
8: STRIDE DlRECTlON 
8: FRONT FOOT POSITION 
f : STRIDE LENGTH 
(B) 
A: SHOULDERS 
B: HIPS 
C: ARMS 
(C) 
FIGURE 2. Batter orientation and movement. A) Global reference frame. B) Stride parameters. C) Segmental rotation around axis of the trunk (AOT). 
general kinematics, including dis- 
placement and velocity for both lin- 
ear and angular measurements. The 
application of force by each foot to 
the ground relative to the coordi- 
nates of the global reference frame 
defined kinetics. 
PARAMETER DESCRIPTION/ 
CALCULATION 
Global Reference Frame 
The global reference frame was 
defined as the three-dimensional co- 
ordinate system in which the relative 
movement of the body was measured 
(Figure 2A). Each of the three axes 
were perpendicular to each other 
and defined three planes of move- 
ment. For this study, the positive X 
axis was the most crucial because it 
was used as a reference for the seg- 
ment rotation and stride parameters. 
It was defined as the direction from 
home plate to the pitching rubber 
and parallel to the surface of the bat- 
ter's box. When looking in the posi- 
tive X direction, positive Z was de- 
fined as pointing superiorly and 
positive Y was defined as pointing to 
the left. 
Ground Reaction Forces 
Ground reaction forces repre- 
sented the interaction of the body 
with the ground (10). The three- 
dimensional force applied to the 
ground by both feet was measured 
during each swing. Each individual 
component of applied force (X, Y, Z) 
in the global reference frame (Figure 
2A) was expressed as a value in N for 
the left and right foot. The resultant 
magnitude of force for each foot was 
expressed as a value in N as well as a 
percentage of body weight. 
Center of Pressure/Center of Mass 
The relative movement of the 
center of pressure between the two 
feet and the body's calculated center 
of mass in the global X direction was 
measured as an indication of dy- 
namic balance and forward momen- 
tum (3,4,15). The position of the 
center of pressure between the two 
feet was calculated by first weighting 
The three-dimensional 
position of the center 
of mass for each 
individual segment was 
summed to produce 
the position of the 
whole body 
center of mass 
in global coordinates. 
the position of the center of pressure 
by the magnitude of the downward 
force for each individual force plate 
(each foot). The two weighted posi- 
tions were then averaged to produce 
the center of pressure between the 
two feet in global coordinates. The 
center of mass was calculated using 
segment center of mass and segment 
body weight percentage measure- 
ments presented by Contini (3). The 
JOSPT Volume 22 Number 5 November 1995 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on April 15, 2026. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 1995 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.

RESEARCH STUDY - --- - - - -- ..---.--..--..--- ?. . - -- . -. .- -- 
three-dimensional position of the 
center of mass for each individual 
segment was calculated, weighted by 
its percentage of body mass, and 
summed to produce the position of 
the whole body center of mass in 
global coordinates. 
Stride 
As the hitter strode forward and 
the front foot made contact with the 
ground, the length and direction of 
the stride as well as the position of 
the left (front) foot were defined 
(Figure 2B). Stride length was the 
distance between the right and left 
toe at foot down. It was expressed as 
a value in cm and as a percentage of 
the width of the hips from right hip 
center to left hip center. The direc- 
tion of the stride was the angle 
formed between the vector from 
right to left toe and the global X axis 
(+ = closed, - = open). The posi- 
tion of the left foot was the angle 
formed between the vector from left 
ankle to left forefoot and the global 
X axis (+ = closed, - = open). 
Both were expressed in degrees. 
Flexion and extension of the left 
and right knee as well as the left and 
right elbow (8) were defined as the 
absolute angle formed between the 
proximal and distal segments com- 
prising the joint. Full anatomical ex- 
tension of the joint corresponded to 
0" while full anatomical flexion of 
the joint corresponded to 180". 
Segment Rotation 
A hitter's ability to utilize a ki- 
netic link to generate bat speed de- 
pended heavily on the interaction of 
three body segments (4.1 1,13). The 
segments were the hips, shoulders, 
and the arms (Figure 2C). The hips 
were defined as a vector from the 
right hip to the left hip. The shoul- 
ders were defined as a vector from 
the right shoulder to the left shoul- 
der and the arms were defined as a 
vector from mid-shoulders to mid- 
wrists. Their interaction was the rota- 
tion around a common axis. This axis 
was defined as the axis of the trunk 
from mid-hips to mid-shoulders and 
the rotation was measured with re- 
spect to the global X axis. 
The orientation of the trunk axis 
was also measured. It was defined as 
the angle formed between the vector 
representing the trunk and the global 
Z axis in the median plane (+ = 
flexion, - = extension) and the 
frontal plane (+ = right, - = left) 
of the body. 
Bat Movement 
The movement of the bat can be 
described by bat lag (2,4,11) and the 
linear velocity of the end of the bat 
(9,17). For this paper, bat lag was 
defined as the absolute angle formed 
between the vector representing the 
bat from the handle to the barrel 
and the vector from mid-shoulders to 
mid-wrists. When the bat was fully 
extended away from the arms and 
both the vector representing the bat 
and the vector representing the arms 
were in line, the corresponding bat 
lag angle was 180". The linear veloc- 
ity at the barrel end of the bat was 
defined by the first derivative of each 
of the component displacements in 
the global reference frame (Figure 
2A) and the resultant magnitude. 
Batting Events 
For the purpose of describing a 
hitter's natural coordination and 
movement, three key events were 
chosen as both landmarks for refer- 
ence and for the identification of key 
mechanical transitions. The first was 
foot off. It was defined as the instant 
the left (front) foot broke contact 
with the ground and began the 
stride. The second was foot down. It 
was defined as the instant the left 
foot made full contact with the 
ground, ending the stride and begin- 
ning closed chain energy transfer. 
The third was ball contact. It was de- 
fined as the instant the bat made 
contact with the ball, beginning the 
follow-through. 
RESULTS 
Before the parameters were cal- 
culated, all threedimensional data 
were smoothed using a fourth-order, 
zero phase shift, low pass Butterworth 
filter with a cut-off frequency of 13.3 
Hz. The individual data included for 
each of the seven subjects were gen- 
erated as the average of their three 
line drive swings. Mean kinematic 
and kinetic data 5 standard deviation 
for the seven subjects are presented 
in Tables 1-4. 
BIOMECHANICAL DESCRIPTION 
The swing was initiated with a 
weight shift toward the right (back) 
leg. At approximately the same time, 
the upper body rotated in a clockwise 
direction (Figure 2C) around the 
axis of the trunk, initiated by the 
arms and shoulders, and followed 
closely by the hips. This began the 
coiling process. 
Foot OffIStride 
Immediately following the initia- 
tion of coiling, the left (front) leg 
was lifted and the left foot broke con- 
tact with the ground (foot off), in- 
creasing the total force applied by 
the right (back) foot to a value of 
102% of body weight. Part of the to- 
tal force applied by each foot was 
shear force acting parallel to the 
ground in the global X and Y direc- 
tions. Ground reaction to the shear 
force promoted the linear and rota- 
tional movement of the hitter. At 
foot off, the right foot applied 146 N 
of shear force in the negative X di- 
rection and 26 N in the positive Y 
direction. The right knee was flexed 
at 32" and the center of pressure had 
moved in the negative X direction 
toward the right foot to a point 20 
cm behind the center of mass. The 
Volume 22 Number 5 November 1995 JOSPT 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on April 15, 2026. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 1995 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.

Parameter 
Foot Off Foot Down Ball Contad 
- - - 
X SD X SD X SD 
Right Foot 
Total force (N) 
Percent of body weight 
X component (N) 
Y component (N) 
Z component (N) 
Left Foot 
Total force (N) 1007 472 709 270 
Percent of body weight 123 63 84 32 
X component (N) 292 167 153 146 
Y component (N) -280 125 28 65 
Z component (N) -91 7 429 -672 270 - 
SD = Standard dwi~tion. 
TABLE 1. Force applied by each foot at key points in swing. 
- 
Parameter X SD 
HMRV ("lsec) 714 76 
SMRV ("Isec) 937 102 
AMRV (O/sec) 1160 96 
BLMRV ("Isec) 1588 162 
BMLV (rnfsec) 3 1 2 
the same time, continued in a clock- 
wise rotation around the axis of the 
trunk, increasing the coil of the up 
per body against the movement of 
the hips and shoulders. 
SD = Standard &viation. 
HMRV = Hip segment maximum rotational velocity. 
SMRV = Shoulder segment maximum rotational 
velocity. 
AMRV = Arm segment maximum rotational velocity. 
BLMRV = Bat lag maximum rotational velocity. 
BMl V = Bat maximum linear velocity. 
TABLE 2. Maximum segment rotational velocities 
and bar linear velocity. 
arms, which led the clockwise rota- 
tion, had rotated to 150" at foot off, 
while the shoulders had rotated to 
30". followed by the hips at 18". This 
rotation occurred around an axis of 
the trunk that was fairly upright. The 
trunk was flexed forward 21" and lat- 
erally left 6". 
As the stride continued toward 
foot down, the hips rotated to a max- 
imum position of 28", 0.350 seconds 
prior to ball contact. At that instant, 
the hips began to rotate in a counter- 
clockwise direction. The shoulders, 
however, continued in a clockwise 
direction, increasing the coil of the 
trunk until they reached a maximum 
rotation of 52", 0.265 seconds prior 
to ball contact. At that instant, they 
changed direction and followed the 
lead of the hips in a counterclockwise 
rotation toward the ball. The arms, at 
Foot Contact 
A. the left forefoot made contact 
with the ground, the length and di- 
rection of the stride were defined. 
The mean stride length was a dis- 
tance of 85 cm or 380% of hip width. 
The direction of the stride was 12" 
(closed) and the position of the foot 
as it began to make contact with the 
ground was 67" (closed) (Figure 2B). 
It was with left foot contact that the 
hitting action became a closed chain 
energy transfer. The arms which had 
increased the coil of the upper body 
by continuing in a clockwise rotation 
around the axis of the trunk reached 
a maximum position of 185" and be- 
gan a counterclockwise rotation. 
Weight was shifted forward as the 
heel of the left foot made contact 
with the ground (foot down). The 
left foot was in a position of 61" 
(closed) and was applying a total 
force equal to 123% of body weight 
to the ground. As a part of the total 
force applied by the left foot, 292 N 
of shear force were applied in the 
positive X direction and 280 N of 
shear force were applied in the nega- 
tive Y direction. The total force ap 
plied by the right foot had decreased 
to 58% of body weight. As a part of 
the total force applied by the right 
foot, 80 N of shear force were ap 
plied in the negative X direction and 
184 N of shear force were applied in 
the positive Y direction. At that point, 
the center of pressure had made a 
drastic shift forward in the X direc- 
tion to a point 20 cm ahead of the 
center of mass. 
With the weight shift forward and 
the shear force applied in the X and 
Y direction by both the left and right 
foot, segments were now accelerated 
to maximum velocities a. the body 
coordinated an effort to produce bat 
speed. The left leg extended at the 
knee, pushing the left hip backward, 
while the right leg pushed the right 
hip forward, creating a counterclock- 
wise acceleration of the hips around 
the axis of the trunk. The rotational 
velocity of the hips increased until it 
reached a maximum of 714"/sec, 
0.075 seconds prior to ball contact. 
The shoulders and arms, following 
the lead of the hips, accelerated to a 
maximum rotational velocity of 937"/ 
sec and 1 160°/sec, respectively, 0.065 
seconds prior to ball contact. 
As a result of the body's coordi- 
nation, the bat also moved around 
the axis of the trunk, increasing in 
both angular velocity and linear ve- 
locity. The two main components of 
linear movement were anterior or 
JOSPT Volume 22 Number 5 November 1995 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on April 15, 2026. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 1995 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.

Foot Off Foot Down Ball Contact 
- - - 
X SD X SD X SD 
Hip rotation ("1 
Shoulder rotation (") 
Arm rotation ("1 
Bat lag ('1 
Right knee flexiodextension ("1 
Left knee flexionlextension ("1 
Right elbow flexionlextension ("1 
Left elbow flexiodextension (") 
Trunk flexiodextension ("1 
Trunk lateral flexion ("1 
Cop-Com (crn) 
SD = Standard deviation. 
Cop-Com = The relative difference in position of the center of pressure between the two feet and the calculated whole body center of mass in the global X direction I(-) center 
of pressure behind center of mass, (+I center of pressure ahead of center of mass/. 
TABLE 3. Position of body parameters at key points in swing. 
Parameter x SD 
Stride length (crn) 85 12 
Stride as percent of hip width 380 75 
Stride direction (") 12 3 
Lead foot position ("1 61 11 - 
SO = Standard deviation. 
TABLE 4. Stride parameters. 
away from the body in the negative Y 
direction and downward in the nega- 
tive Z direction. The anterior move- 
ment of the bat away from the body 
increased to a velocity of 19 m/sec at 
0.040 seconds before ball contact. At 
the same time, the downward move- 
ment of the bat increased to a maxi- 
mum velocity of 16 m/sec. The linear 
motion of the bat then became domi- 
nated by an increase in the positive X 
direction toward the ball, while the Y 
and Z components of linear velocity 
decreased in magnitude (Figure 4). 
Nearing the point of impact, the 
hitter utilized the last bit of angular 
speed and kinetic link as the speed 
of bat lag or uncocking reached its 
maximum value of 1588"/sec at 0.020 
seconds before ball contact (Table 2, 
Figure 3). The bat was then driven to 
its maximum linear velocity of 31 
m/sec in unison with the right arm 
maximum extension velocity of 9487 
sec, both occurring 0.015 seconds 
before ball contact. 
Ball Contact 
At ball contact, the body had 
used both coordination and position 
to generate bat speed and direction. 
The linear speed of the bat had de- 
celerated slightly to 29 m/sec, but 
the most significant component of 
that speed was directed in the posi- 
tive X direction toward the ball. The 
left leg was acting as a block, flexed 
15" at the knee and applying a total 
force to the ground equal to 84% of 
body weight. The right leg was now 
acting in a support capacity, flexed 
45" at the knee and applying a total 
force of 16% of body weight to the 
ground. The trunk had moved 
through a significant range of motion 
in an effort to assist in bat position 
and become an extension of the 
front leg's block. It had moved 
through a range of 30" backward to a 
position of 9" of trunk extension. It 
had also moved through a range of 
26" right to a position of 20" of right 
lateral flexion. 
After ball contact, the body acted 
to slow itself and the bat through ec- 
centric contraction and the diffusion 
of energy through the larger muscle 
groups (5). This study focused on the 
swing from foot off to ball contact; 
however, insight into the follow- 
through portion and the deceleration 
of segments can be gained using de- 
scriptions by Shaffer et al (16). Gar- 
hammer (5), and DeRenne (4). 
DISCUSSION 
To begin the process of building 
an understanding of mechanics and 
the demands placed on the body dur- 
ing the swing, it is essential to have a 
base understanding. The intent of 
this paper is to provide the first step 
through a quantitative biomechanical 
description of hitting a baseball. The 
description presented is not only fun- 
damental to the knowledge of the 
mechanics of hitting, but also for the 
approach to analyzing a hitter's per- 
formance at the plate. A subject-posi- 
tioned batting tee was used in this 
study to try to eliminate the variables 
of recognition, reaction, and adjust- 
ment to a pitched baseball. The re- 
sulting data, summarized in Tables 
1-4, provide a very useful guide for 
understanding the general principles 
of both the mechanics and the physi- 
ology involved in hitting a baseball. 
The results also provide a foundation 
for not only studying the individual 
parameters more thoroughly, but 
studying variations within and be- 
tween individual hitters. 
Much like a golfer, the hitter 
generates bat speed using a kinetic 
link (11.13). A kinetic link can be 
briefly summarized as large base seg- 
ments "passing" momentum to 
Volume 22 Number 5 November 1995 JOSFT 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on April 15, 2026. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 1995 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.

RESEARCH STUDY 
FIGURE 3. Sequence of events occurring in a baseball swing in relation to ball contact Events: I) foot off, 
2) maximum hip rotation, 3) maximum shoulder rotation, 4) maximum arm rotation, 5) foot down, 6) maximum hip 
rotational velocity, 7) maximum shoulder and arm rotational velocity, 8) maximum Y and Z components of bat 
linear velocity, 91 bat lag maximum rotational velocity, 10) maximum bat linear velocity and maximum right elbow 
extension velocity, 1 1) maximum X component ofbat linear velocity, 12) ball contact, and 131 maximum lefi elbow 
extension velocity. 
smaller adjacent segments. The basic 
principle is that a system of segments 
moving at a certain velocity has mo- 
mentum. When a large base segment 
decelerates, the velocity of the re- 
maining system increases as it as- 
sumes the momentum lost by the 
base segment. In the particular in- 
stance of hitting mechanics, the seg- 
ments are interrelated via the muscu- 
loskeletal system. This system can 
potentially accelerate and decelerate 
the segments through the application 
of muscular force, therefore, adding 
a second component to the kinetic 
link. Optimizing both the mechanical 
and physiological components creates 
the "motivation" for a majority of the 
mechanics incorporated during the 
hitting motion. Consequently, a large 
part of a hitter's mechanical perfor- 
mance is derived from maximizing 
the kinetic link parameters. 
A hitter starts the swing with the 
clockwise rotation (right-handed hit- 
ter) of the arm, shoulder, and hip 
segments, while shifting weight to- 
ward the rear foot. This action can 
be considered the act of loading or 
coiling. The hitter moves segments 
opposite of both the intended rota- 
tional (counterclockwise for right- 
handed hitter) and linear (forward in 
the global positive X) direction be- 
fore accelerating into ball contact. 
This action defines two components 
of motion: rotational and linear. 
The rotational component in- 
volves the movement of segments 
around the axis of the trunk. The 
important factors to consider during 
the stride are the amount of clock- 
wise rotation by each segment and 
the sequence of the initial movement 
of each segment in the counterclock- 
wise (intended) direction. As shown 
in the results (Figure 3), it is impor- 
tant that the hip segment starts coun- 
terclockwise rotation before the 
shoulder segment, which, in turn, 
should start before the arm segment. 
This sequence allows the kinetic link 
system to begin to incorporate the 
musculature of the trunk and upper 
extremity through preload. Excessive 
clockwise rotation of individual seg- 
ments or all of the segments may 
contribute to a reduction of muscular 
efficiency as well as produce a disrup 
tion in the sequencing of segments. 
In turn, the disruption of the se- 
quence of each segment's initial rota- 
tion in the counterclockwise (intend- 
ed) direction interrupts the hitter's 
ability to fully incorporate the trunk 
and upper extremity musculature. 
The linear component is the for- 
ward movement (global positive X 
direction) of the body. By shifting 
weight to the rear foot, the hitter has 
moved the center of pressure behind 
the position of the center of mass 
(global X direction). Data in Table 3 
show that the center of mass can be 
20 cm ahead of the center of pres 
sure. This moves the body out of an 
equilibrium state where the center of 
pressure and center of mass are 
aligned (15). causing the body to 
"motivate" toward the direction of 
the center of mass. This, combined 
with the application of shear force by 
the right foot (rear) in the global 
negative X direction, drives the hitter 
in a linear fashion toward the ball. 
As the hitter's stride foot makes 
contact with the ground, the linear 
component and the rotational com- 
ponent begin to interact with each 
other. The interaction of the two 
movements determine how the ki- 
netic link will be utilized. At foot 
down, the center of pressure has now 
moved ahead of the center of mass 
(Table 3). The application of shear 
forces by the left and right foot (Ta- 
ble 1) produce a force couple at the 
hip segment, facilitating its counter- 
clockwise acceleration around the 
axis of the trunk. At this point in the 
swing, the hitter can mechanically 
emphasize either the rotational or 
linear component. If the rotational 
component is emphasized, the center 
of pressure aligns itself with the cen- 
Proper timing facilitates 
successively higher 
rotational velocities. 
ter of mass between both feet. This 
allows significant shear force to be 
applied by each foot and increases 
the force couple applied to the hip 
segment. If the linear component is 
emphasized, then the center of pres- 
sure stays in a forward position at the 
lead foot and the center of mass 
moves to align itself over the lead 
leg. In this case, the only significant 
shear application is produced by the 
lead foot, reducing the force couple 
applied to the hip segment for accel- 
eration. The results of this study 
demonstrate that the emphasis of 
rotational and linear movements var- 
ies between hitters as shown by high 
standard deviations in shear force 
application (Table 1) and center of 
mass/center of pressure relative 
movement (Table 3). 
JOSFT Volume 22 Number 5 November 1995 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on April 15, 2026. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 1995 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.

left 
X COMPONENT 
(m/s> 
right 
posterior 
Y COMPONENT 
(m/4 
anterior 
Z COMPONENT 
(m/4 
down 
LINEAR VELOCITY 
(m/s> 
-1.0 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 
Time (s) 
FIGURE 4. Component and resultant linear velocities of the bat during a ~ypical baseball swing. Vertical axis is 
velocity (dsecj and horizontal axis is time (seconds). Time of 0.0 represents ball contact. 
Regardless of individual mechan- 
ics, the hip segment is accelerated 
around the axis of the trunk to a 
maximum velocity. This increases the 
velocity of the entire system moving 
in the intended direction. The hip 
segment is then decelerated, as the 
shoulder segment is accelerated, uti- 
lizing the kinetic link principle (4,11, 
13). Again, timing is essential for the 
most efficient acceleration of each 
successive segment, culminating with 
the bat. Proper timing facilitates suc- 
cessively higher rotational velocities 
(Table 2). which, in turn, produce 
bat speed and power. Conversely, if a 
smaller adjacent segment reaches a 
maximum velocity before the preced- 
ing base segment, then it has lost the 
ability to make full use of the speed 
and, consequently, the momentum 
generated by the base segment. 
Although these data are a prelim- 
inary step needed to lay the ground 
work for more indepth study, they 
certainly serve as pertinent informa- 
tion for the clinician, whether that be 
the physician, therapist, trainer, or 
coach. The information in this paper 
provides a fundamental understand- 
ing of hitting biomechanics, which 
can serve as the basis for a structured 
and informed approach to the reha- 
bilitation and training of the hitting 
athlete. 
SUMMARY 
The purpose of this study was to 
provide a foundation for the biome- 
chanical study of hitting and the pre- 
liminary synthesis of data for applica- 
tion to the rehabilitation and training 
of the hitting athlete. This goal is 
achieved by presenting a biomechani- 
cal description of hitting a baseball 
using the mean kinematic and kinetic 
data of seven professional baseball play- 
ers in a controlled environment The 
emphasis of the data presented is the 
portrayal of the body's natural motion 
and coordination. 
Additional studies are being con- 
ducted and will focus specifically on: 
1) the relationship between the rota- 
tional and linear components of 
weight transfer, 2) the specific inter- 
action of segments involved in the 
kinetic link, and 3) the acceleration 
and power with which the bat moves 
into contact with the ball. Each of 
the additional studies will concen- 
trate on a specific area of biomechan- 
ics introduced in this study. This will 
allow the concepts and principles 
involved to be fully investigated. The 
combination of all these studies will 
provide a comprehensive understand- 
ing of the biomechanics and coordi- 
nation involved during the baseball 
swing. In addition, they will provide a 
stepping stone for the total under- 
standing of a hitter's performance at 
the plate. JOSPT 
Volume 22 a Number 5 November 1995 JOSPT 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on April 15, 2026. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 1995 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.

. . . . , . . . . . . .. .. . RESEARCH STUDY 
-. .. *.-- - -. .. .--. ---.---..,- ..--..- .. -.- ". . - . -. . ... 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors acknowledge the 
contributions of Sean Cunningham, 
ATC, CSCS of the Montreal Expos as 
well as the entire Montreal Expos 
organization for their baseball guid- 
ance and expertise. We also thank 
the athletes who participated in our 
study and continue to support our 
ongoing effort to study injury and 
performance mechanics. 
REFERENCES 
1. Breen JL: What makes a good hitter? J 
Health Phys Ed Rec 38:36-39, 1967 
2. Budney DR, Bellow DG: Kinetic anal- 
ysis of a golf swing. Res Q 50(2):171- 
179, 1979 
3. Contini R: Body segment parameters. 
Part 11. Artif Limbs 16(1):1-19, 1972 
4. DeRenne C: High-Tech Hitting: Sci- 
ence vs. Tradition, St. Paul, MN: West 
Publishing Company, 1 993 
5. Garhammer J: A kinesiological analysis 
of hitting for baseball. Natl Strength Con- 
ditioning Asxx J 5(2):6 -7, 70-7 1, 1 983 
6. Lau C, Glombrenner A, LaRussa T: The 
Art of Hitting .300, New York, NY: Vi- 
king Penguin, 199 1 
7. Lefebvre ): Hitting the baseball: Let's 
understand the process. Natl Strength 
Conditioning Assoc J 5(2):6 -7, 70-71, 
1983 
8. Mclntyre DR, ffautsch EW: A kine- 
matic analysis of the baseball batting 
swings involved in opposite-field and 
same-field hitting. Res Q Exerc Sport 
53(3):206-2 13, 1982 
9. Messier Sf, Owen MG: Bat dynamics 
of female fast pitch softball batters. Res 
Q Exerc Sport 55(2): 14 1 - 145, 1 984 
10. Messier Sf, Owen MG: The mechanics 
of batting: Analysis of ground reaction 
forces and seleaed lower extremity kine- 
matics. Res Q Exerc Sport 56(2):138- 
143, 1985 
1 1. Milburn PD: Summation of segmental 
velocities in the golf swing. Med Sci 
Sports Exerc 74:60-64, 1982 
12. Miller RG, Shay CT: Relationship of re- 
action time to the speed of a sohball. 
Res Q 35(Suppl3):433-437, 1964 
13. Putnam CA: Sequential motions of 
body segments in striking and throwing 
skills: Description and explanations. J 
Biomech 26(Suppl): 125-1 35, 1983 
14. Race DE: A cinematographics and me- 
chanical analysis of the external move- 
ments involved in hitting a baseball ef- 
fectively. Res Q 32(3):394-404, 1961 
15. Riley PO, Schenkman ML, Mann RW, 
Hodge WA: Mechanics of a con- 
strained chair-rise. ] Biomech 24(1):77- 
85, 1991 
16. Shaffer B, lobe FW, Pink M, Perry J: 
Baseball batting: An electrom yographic 
study. Clin Orthop 292:285-298, 1993 
17. Shapiro R: Three-dimensional kinetic 
analysis of the baseball swing. Unpub- 
lished doctoral dissertation, University 
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urba- 
na-Champaign, IL, 1979 
18. Watts L: Classroom approach to bat- 
ting. Scholastic Coach 35: 19-20, 1966 
19. Williams T, Underwood): The Science 
of Hitting, New York, NY: Simon and 
Schuster Inc., 1986 
JOSPT Volume 22 Number 5 November 1995 
 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® 
 Downloaded from www.jospt.org at on April 15, 2026. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 1995 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy®. All rights reserved.
